hello mats fans this is tomrux maths on
tour
in delft in the netherlands and in this
video we're going to find a mandelball
let's go
[Music]
i've come to the sleepy university town
of delft in the netherlands
to try to find a mandelbulb
determined to track one down i decided
to make my way into the city
and begin my search
hold on let's rewind a second
what is a mandal bulb a mandal bulb is a
3d representation of
a fractal and a fractal is an object
that looks the same
no matter how far you zoom in towards it
despite being incredibly complex
fractals are surprisingly easy to
generate
take this cliff behind me turns out it's
actually a stone
because rocks demonstrate fractal
patterns as you zoom in closer and
closer on a rock
you get the same pattern appearing
fractals appear everywhere in nature
and i really do mean everywhere anything
which demonstrates self-similarity
is a fractal so you can think of the
branches of a tree
the stems and leaves of a plant the
blood vessels growing and flowing
through your body
even an endless series of russian
nesting dolls and perhaps my favorite
example
the coastline of a country these are all
fractal
in nature fractals are routinely used to
model chaotic motion
chaos is something that's so random that
it's completely
unpredictable and surprisingly fractals
do a very good job of representing this
type of behavior
take turbulence for example if you have
two waves on the surface of the ocean
crashing into one another they generate
this chaotic pattern on the surface
if you were to repeat the same thing
with what you thought were the same two
waves
you would get a very different result
and this
is chaos in action examples in nature
are all
well and good but what about something a
little bit more mathematical
well here is a line
now let's divide our line into three
equal
segments like so and if we now remove
the middle segment
so i have my one on this end i had a
little bit here
and i've removed the middle and if i now
fill the gap in the middle
with two lines of equal length that we
have removed
like so it forms a little wedge shape
and you can imagine repeating this
process on our new
four lines so each line is going to be
divided
up exactly as we did in the first place
and then we remove the middle line and
replace it
with the wedge shape
so pretending that these guys aren't
here
we've created a sort of small scale
fractal of the initial
bump the initial wedge that we started
with now let's do one more just to
really demonstrate exactly
what's happening and then again if i
divide up
each of these lines into three equal
parts
you can begin to see how things get very
complicated
very quickly and this is basically
creating our own miniature fractal
this is called a curve now if we
redo the exact same thing
but instead of starting with a line we
start with a triangle
it creates something called the cox
snowflake
and now let's do the exact same process
generating a cot curve on each of the
three sides
of our triangle so remember the first
step is to divide
our line into three equal components
so we do that on each of our three sides
of the equilateral triangle
then we remove the middle section and
replace it
with our wedge like so
looks like a star of david in fact and
now
i'm going to do the same with all of
these little individual bits
we then remove the middle section and
replace it with our little
wedge and you can hopefully
begin to get an idea of what this would
look like if i were to then repeat this
on each of our lines and continue
forever
this would generate a fractal and this
guy is called
the cox snowflake it has the very fun
property
that the perimeter the distance around
the edge of our snowflake
is going to equal infinity whereas the
area
the bit inside is going to be finite and
you can think about this as follows
when we start with our original triangle
each side
has length one shall we say so we have
unit length
then when we replace one of our segments
by an extra two we're actually then
getting
four thirds or four over three of the
length that we started with
so every time we repeat the fractal
generating process
we add in a factor of four thirds so
doing this
n times gives us a perimeter
of four thirds to the power n
and now as n gets larger and larger and
larger this number will get larger and
larger
because four thirds is bigger than one
and any number larger than one
taken to a larger and larger power
becomes bigger
and bigger so this is going to tend to
infinity
as n goes to infinity and this is the
perimeter now the area inside our
triangle
we have some starting value let's call
it
a for our initial first
triangle and then as we add on each
little bit we are increasing the area
but the point is that the bits we add
are getting smaller and smaller and
smaller
and they actually get small enough
quickly enough
as it were to give us a finite area so
the total area as we let n go to
infinity
is equal to eight fifths
times our original area of our
triangle
back in delft i was struggling to find
any mandal bulbs
and the pressure was really starting to
get to me
i'd search high and low but still no
sign of any mandal bulbs
[Music]
where are the handles
back to mundo bulbs i mentioned at the
beginning that a bundle bulb is a 3d
representation
of a 2d fractal and that particular
fractal is the mandelbrot
set so just like we devised a particular
method and a set of instructions
to devise our curve we can do the
same
to derive the mandelbrot set and this is
how it works
we start off by picking a complex number
c where c
is just equal to any complex number
which is a
plus b times i where i is the square
root of minus
1. so we can represent c perhaps
as a two dimensional vector a
b now we have our number c what we do
is our first iteration of our mandelbrot
set is to say that z one
equals c then to get the next
number in our list in our set we define
z2 to be c squared
plus c and then for z3
what we do is we take z2
and we square it so that's c squared
plus c
squared and then we add c
so you'll hopefully notice that we
started with c
we then squared it and added c and then
took our answer from step two and
squared it and added
c and if we continued in this way we
would generate a list
where the k plus first entry is equal to
z
k squared plus c in other words
take the entry that we have square it
and add c
and we get the next number for different
values of c
this will give a list of numbers and if
we remember
that our number c is actually
represented as a point in our
two-dimensional plane
then each list will represent a
different
number of points in the entire plane
and now depending on which c we started
with
we will either go to infinity as the
numbers get bigger and bigger and bigger
which is called diverging or a divergent
sequence of numbers or which is what we
actually want here
we're going to get a repeating pattern
of numbers
which will not go to infinity
the mandelbrot set is actually a 2d
representation
of these points c which do not go to
infinity
using this method mandelbrot sets are
incredibly
beautiful if you continue to zoom in on
the image
you go through a series of different
views until you eventually
return to where you started this is the
inherent behavior
of a fractal mandelbrot sets are of
course very different
to the cox snowflake which we looked at
before and that begs the question
how do you compare different fractals
one way to do that is using the
hausdorff dimension
we are used to thinking of dimensions as
whole numbers
so for example a line is a
one-dimensional
object a plane would be two-dimensional
and something like a cube or a sphere
would be three-dimensional but what
happens if we allow our dimensions
to have a number between one and two or
a number between
two and three what does that even mean
this is exactly what the household
dimension is
it's a measure of how well your object
fills the space
in which it is contained so in our
instance with the mandelbrot set
we want to measure how well does our
fractal fill
the two-dimensional plane if we take a
simple example
of a half plane where we say we have our
y
and our x axes and we say that x must be
greater than zero
then the half plane has a haustdorf
dimension of 1.5
because it fills exactly half of the
space if we consider some examples using
particular values for the mandelbrot set
we get different values of d so for
example
when c is equal to minus 1 we get a d
value of 1.27
it fills around a quarter of our plane
and if we let c equal one quarter then
we get a d
value of one point zero eight so whilst
these are both mandelbrot
sets they have a different shape and
therefore a different haustdorf
dimension
d the more space filled by your fractal
the closer its value of d
will be to the number two a nice example
is the sipinski
carpet we begin with a
square and if the entire square is
filled
then we have a value of d equals two it
fills all of the space
however of course with a fractal we are
not going to fill
all of our space what we are going to do
is divide our square into nine
equal smaller squares
and then we're going to remove the
central square
from our remaining grid next we repeat
this process
on each of the eight squares remaining
so we divide up
into a grid of nine squares
and then we remove the central square
from each of the smaller eight squares
and then of course we repeat the process
so we divide up
each square into another small nine
removing
the central one so i will just
demonstrate
for this upper left hand corner square
but the same thing will have to be done
across the entire shape
to leave us with the sipinski
carpet the hausdorff dimension for a
sipinski carpet
has d equal to 1.89
so as you can see from these images it
fills most of the space
around 90 percent of it but not quite
the entire
two-dimensional space back in delft
i'd been going so crazy trying to find a
mandelbulb that i enlisted the help of
my good friend joe
joe usually has a knack for these kinds
of things and he told me that i'd be
better off trying to model a mandelbulb
instead of trying to find one to do this
we decided to take some inspiration from
a real world fractal
let's return to coastlines imagine you
have to measure the length of the uk
coastline and the only tool you have is
a one meter ruler
you would walk around the country and
you would make your measurement
you would get some value let's call it l
one
now if you went back and used a smaller
ruler let's say a thirty centimeter
ruler
you would get a different value for the
length of the coastline
you would in fact get a larger value
let's call it l2
where l2 is bigger than l1 and that's
because by using the 30 centimeter ruler
you are able to more accurately measure
the jagged or
fractal nature of the coastline
formalizing this mathematically
we have that the length l is equal to e
times
n where e is the length of your
measuring instrument and
n is the number of instruments needed to
cover the whole
length so with the 1 meter ruler even
though e is larger
the number of measurements we make n
will be much
smaller and for the 30 centimeter ruler
e of course will be smaller but n will
be much
larger and n is much larger in such a
way
that our final value of the length is
slightly bigger
in fact we have a formula for any
fractal curve which connects the number
of measuring sticks n
the length e and the fractal dimension d
the formula says that n is proportional
to 1 divided by
e to the power d multiplying both sides
of the equation by
e we then get that the length which is e
times
n is proportional to 1 divided by
e to the power of d minus 1. the key is
that the uk coastline
does not have a dimension of d equal to
1 because it's not a straight line
the actual value is d equals 1.26
and what this means in our formula is
that we have a number e
which is to a positive power on our
denominator
because d minus one is greater than zero
and so as e becomes smaller and smaller
we are dividing by a number which gets
closer and closer to zero
and this ultimately will cause the
length to go to infinity
of course the uk coastline is not
actually
infinite in length if you start at one
point on the coast
and walk around the entire country you
do get back to where you started
which is why this is called the coast
line
paradox since we are talking about
dimensions
i have to mention space filling curves
these are very similar to fractals
in the sense that you follow a set of
instructions to draw your
shape but with a space filling curve it
will actually fill the entire space
within which it is contained so in the
plane a 2d space filling curve
will draw a perfect line which fills
every single point
in that plane if allowed to continue
forever
these were discovered in 1890 by italian
mathematician pino
and they have housed off dimension equal
to two because they fill the entire
plane i'd say we're just about ready now
to think about building a mandelball
so remember a bundle bulb is a 3d
rendering of the two-dimensional fractal
the mandelbrot set in general it's quite
difficult to build a three-dimensional
fractal
so let's start with a more familiar
example taking our sipinski carpet which
we worked on earlier
we can create a 3d version of this which
is called
a menger sponge before we divided up our
square
into nine equal squares and then remove
the middle one
so let's follow the same pattern take
our cube
divide it up into 27 smaller cubes
so that's nine divisions on each face
like before
and then again as before we're going to
remove the central
cube but not only the central cube we
also remove the six which are attached
to each of its faces
you can imagine removing a
three-dimensional plus sign
from the center of our cube this is the
first step towards creating the menger
sponge
we then repeat the same process on the
remaining 20 cubes
exactly as before and we generate our
three-dimensional fractal
the menger sponge in this case we have a
hausdorff dimension
d equal to 2.72
that's one way to generate a
three-dimensional fractal
but how do we do this for the mandelbrot
set
first we need to think about how did we
generate the mandelbrot set
in two dimensions in the first place we
started with a formula
z k plus one equals z k squared plus
c and here z is a complex
number now you can think of a complex
number
z equals a plus i times b as a two
vector
if you put the real number as the first
component of your vector
and the imaginary part of the number as
the second component
you have a vector a b when we multiply
complex numbers together
we know how to do this we do a plus ib
times itself a plus ib gives us a
squared minus b squared
plus 2 a b i and writing this as a 2
vector
we get a squared minus b squared in
position 1
and 2 a b in position 2.
now the problem is if we were to
generalize this to three dimensions
we don't really have a three-dimensional
analog of complex
numbers there is no well-defined way to
do multiplication
for three vectors perhaps surprisingly
we can actually do this in four
dimensions
and create a perfect true
four-dimensional
mandelbrot set but of course
unfortunately we can't show you a
four-dimensional
object we live in a three-dimensional
world the best we can do in 3d
is to create the three-dimensional
rendering of the mandelbrot set it is
not a true
mandelbrot to create our mandolbs then
we just need to define
three vector multiplication and we do
this using the white
nylander formula the trick is to think
about what's happening geometrically
when we multiply together two complex
numbers if you've ever experimented with
an argan diagram
if you have a complex number and you
multiply it by
another complex number ultimately
there's a stretch
and a rotation the modulus or the
distance of your point from the origin
will either increase or decrease and the
argument
the angle from the positive x-axis will
again either increase
or decrease so there's a stretch a shift
in the distance from the origin
and a rotation a change in your argument
for a typical complex number z equals a
plus b
i it has a modulus equal to a squared
squared an argument equal to arc tan of
b
over a when we square the number
we now have modulus equal to a squared
minus b squared
all squared plus 4a squared b
squared and this simplifies to be equal
to a squared plus b
squared squared which is exactly the
square
of the original modulus and the argument
of z squared is twice the original
argument working in exponential form we
can write z
as r e to the i theta
which means that when we now take z
squared
we get r squared e to the 2
i theta and it's quite clear from this
particular expression
that the modulus has become squared and
the argument is twice that of the
original
theta if we generalize this to any power
n we get a very similar result
we have the modulus to the power n and
then we have
n times our argument what the white
nylander formula does is generalize this
concept to three dimensions
so taking a three vector to some power m
just means taking its length to the
power n
and multiplying its angle by the number
n
since we are now working in three
dimensions the analog to the r
theta definition of a complex number by
a plane polar coordinates
is to use spherical polar coordinates
this means
that for a three vector r theta phi
taken to the power n we get r to the
power
n n times theta and n times phi
so taking these new values for the
radius
and our two angles and plugging them
into our spherical polar coordinates
will give us a new point in spherical
coordinates using this as our definition
of multiplication of a three vector
we can now use the original manglebrot
formula
to generate our mandelbulbs
[Music]
the first mandal bulb looks very much
like the mandelbrot set
and that's because we've taken the exact
same formula
z squared plus c we're remembering
that the multiplication is defined via
our three-dimensional
extension of multiplication of complex
numbers
but we can do things more generally
because we didn't just define
multiplication
for powers of two we actually defined it
for powers of
n so if we consider the more general
formula
z of k plus one equals z k
to the power n plus c we can actually
put in
different values of n and generate
different
mandals so for n equals 2 we have the 3d
rendering
of the actual mandelbrot set and then as
we increase
n we get different mandals n equals
eight
is perhaps the most famous which is the
one that you may have seen before
the mandible for n equals eight is in
fact the one used in the film
annihilation
[Music]
i came to delft to find a mandal bulb
unfortunately i failed but as you can
see
by these fantastic shapes behind me i
have ended up building my very own
bundle bulb
instead before i go i'll leave you all
with a question
we've looked at mandibles for different
values of n
but what's going to happen as n gets
larger and larger
what happens when n tends to infinity
send your answers in to at tomrocksmats
on twitter facebook and instagram
you can also get in touch on my website
tomrocsmaths.com
and remember if you've enjoyed watching
this video please do subscribe to my
channel of all the correct entries we
will draw one name out of a hat
and send you a signed mandelbulb print
thank you very much for watching and
thank you to joe and jamie
for producing the video
[Music]
[Applause]
you